# Data Visualization

## Assignment 3: Final Project

### Requirements:
- We will finish this class by giving you the chance to use what you have learned in a practical context, by creating data visualizations from raw data. 
- Choose a dataset of interest from the [City of Toronto’s Open Data Portal](https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/data-research-maps/open-data/) or [Ontario’s Open Data Catalogue](https://data.ontario.ca/). 
- Using Python and one other data visualization software (Excel or free alternative, Tableau Public, any other tool you prefer), create two distinct visualizations from your dataset of choice.  
- For each visualization, describe and justify: 
    > What software did you use to create your data visualization?
    - Tableau Public is used to create Bubble Plot between Production vs Total Farm Value with bubble size based on Farm Value per Litre and color based on Year.
    > Who is your intended audience? 
    - Ontario Farmers producing Maple Syrup
    > What information or message are you trying to convey with your visualization? 
    - Trends Over Time: The plots are designed to show the trends and changes over the years for three key metrics in the Ontario maple syrup industry:
    - Production (kilolitres): This shows the yearly production (in kilolitres) of maple syrup.
    - Farm Value Per Litre ($/litre): This highlights farm value per litre of maple syrup over time.
    - Total Farm Value ($'000): This reflects the overall farm value generated by the maple syrup.
    > What design principles (substantive, perceptual, aesthetic) did you consider when making your visualization? How did you apply these principles? With what elements of your plots? 
    - Aesthetic - I avoided overwhelming the viewer with unnecessary elements. The plots are simple, pleasing, and easy to understand. By using simple markers, legends, and clear axes titles and main title, the focus remained on the data.
    - Substantive - I ensured that the data visualizations accurately represented the data, with correct formatting. The data is presented honestly and shows positive trends with an increase over the years. 
    - perceptual - The plots clearly show the timely change in the Maple Syrup production, how the value per litre most of time till 2015 and then sharp decline in the value afterwards. Production and the Total Farm value are correlated and follow almost same trend.
    > How did you ensure that your data visualizations are reproducible? If the tool you used to make your data visualization is not reproducible, how will this impact your data visualization? 
    - Line + Scatter plot from the **Plotly** library is reproducible. There is a python code available for this plot. This ensures that the plot can be easily regenerated and shared with others, making it easy to   verify, modify, or update the analysis.
    - Bubble Plot using Tableau is not reproducible because it doesn’t provide a way to share the code or steps, making it hard to recreate or verify the visualization later. 
    > How did you ensure that your data visualization is accessible?  
    - I ensured my data visualization is accessible by using simple language and adding clear titles and axis labels with a larger font size. I also used high contrast colors in the Python plot to make it easier to interpret, especially for those with visual impairments. These steps help improve readability and ensure the visualization is accessible to a wider audience.
    - In the Tableau plot, I used a clear title, labels, and legends to enhance readability. The font style is Arial Black with a size of 14, which helps make the text accessible.
    > Who are the individuals and communities who might be impacted by your visualization?  
    - Researchers and Analysts, Farmers and Producers, Government Bodies and Policy Makers, Consumers and General Public.
    > How did you choose which features of your chosen dataset to include or exclude from your visualization? 
    - I focused on showing the trends over the years for key features: Production, Farm Value per Litre, and Total Farm Value. In the Tableau plot, I included all features in a single visualization, making it easy to interpret how each feature changes over time.
    > What ‘underwater labour’ contributed to your final data visualization product?
    - All the data features are included in the visualization and also selected the appropriate chart types (scatter, line, and bubble) and decided the layout and arrangement of subplots to visualize the features side by side. The visual style of the plots with interactive features like hover.
- This assignment is intentionally open-ended - you are free to create static or dynamic data visualizations, maps, or whatever form of data visualization you think best communicates your information to your audience of choice! 
- Total word count should not exceed **(as a maximum) 1000 words** 
 
### Why am I doing this assignment?:  
- This ongoing assignment ensures active participation in the course, and assesses the learning outcomes: 
* Create and customize data visualizations from start to finish in Python
* Apply general design principles to create accessible and equitable data visualizations
* Use data visualization to tell a story  
- This would be a great project to include in your GitHub Portfolio – put in the effort to make it something worthy of showing prospective employers!

### Rubric:

| Component         | Scoring  | Requirement                                                                 |
|-------------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Data Visualizations | Complete/Incomplete | - Data visualizations are distinct from each other<br>- Data visualizations are clearly identified<br>- Different sources/rationales (text with two images of data, if visualizations are labeled)<br>- High-quality visuals (high resolution and clear data)<br>- Data visualizations follow best practices of accessibility |
| Written Explanations | Complete/Incomplete | - All questions from assignment description are answered for each visualization<br>- Explanations are supported by course content or scholarly sources, where needed |
| Code              | Complete/Incomplete | - All code is included as an appendix with your final submissions<br>- Code is clearly commented and reproducible |

## Submission Information

🚨 **Please review our [Assignment Submission Guide](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md)** 🚨 for detailed instructions on how to format, branch, and submit your work. Following these guidelines is crucial for your submissions to be evaluated correctly.

### Submission Parameters:
* Submission Due Date: `23:59 - 09/03/2025`
* The branch name for your repo should be: `assignment-4`
* What to submit for this assignment:
    * A folder/directory containing:
        * This file (assignment_3.md)
        * Two data visualizations 
        * Two markdown files for each both visualizations with their written descriptions.
        * Link to your dataset of choice.
        * Complete and commented code as an appendix (for your visualization made with Python, and for the other, if relevant) 
* What the pull request link should look like for this assignment: `https://github.com/<your_github_username>/visualization/pull/<pr_id>`
    * Open a private window in your browser. Copy and paste the link to your pull request into the address bar. Make sure you can see your pull request properly. This helps the technical facilitator and learning support staff review your submission easily.

Checklist:
- [ ] Create a branch called `assignment-3`.
- [ ] Ensure that the repository is public.
- [ ] Review [the PR description guidelines](https://github.com/UofT-DSI/onboarding/blob/main/onboarding_documents/submissions.md#guidelines-for-pull-request-descriptions) and adhere to them.
- [ ] Verify that the link is accessible in a private browser window.

If you encounter any difficulties or have questions, please don't hesitate to reach out to our team via our Slack. Our Technical Facilitators and Learning Support staff are here to help you navigate any challenges.
